---
layout: post
title: If...
---

While reading listen to [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e2G8EWy-plM).###A man with a chinAlrighty[^1]. Everybody loves Jeremy Corbyn now. My goodness, when I first heard he is going to stand in the Labour leadership election I thought "Great! Nationalisation of railways, so they can actually be a _service_ instead of a for profit company? Check. Looking for missed and evaded revenue instead of just mindlessly flying around adding pointless taxes on everything? Check. Sensible approach to immigration and benefits that stays true to the principles of welfare state? Check." Well this Jeremy chap, he looks like a wet dream of the Left. Gosh, he even doesn't wear a tie! And he was against war! Now, the only thing left (pun intended) is to let him win, sit back, grab popcorn and watch capitalism collapse in front of his five-o'clock-stubble covered [chin](http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/files/2015/08/jeremy.jpg) (soon to be chiseled in stone and reproduced on samizdat prints throughout the world, as the incoming world revolution's symbol). This is what we have all been waiting for, right?###I'm afraid not.Let's start from the beginning. On the Left there exists a particular type of a messiah complex. A Batman in a trockite cap, with Marx's [_Gesammelte Werke_](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c4/Marx-Engels-Werke.JPG) under his arm and of course _sans_ tie is gonna come and fix everything. The disciples don't have to move a finger, he will sort things out. It doesn't stop here. Afterwards disciples are going to crucify him, hush everybody who could actually understand him and proceed to preach that the world revolution is imminent. Left is plagued by St. Pauls who keep on saying that the return of the Chosen One is just around the corner. Jeremy Corbyn has just been given this thorny crown of the Left's messiah, like many before him, most recent and probably one of the most vivid examples being Alexis Tsipras. Nobody constructively criticises the messiah *before* his act, everybody does that after they get defeated by the forces of capitalism. Remember Yannis Varoufakis? Yeah, the guy on the motorbike. He went from being a hero to a villain in three months just for trying to do what everybody expected him to do. Then he failed (as he was doomed to) and everybody is ripping their tie-less shirts open.Then lets try to look at Corbyn's views before he gets elected unto anything instead of crying blue moon when he fails afterwards.
###EconomyOn the economics front he basically repeats the old song of end with austerity and [quantitative easing](https://www.khanacademy.org/economics-finance-domain/core-finance/money-and-banking/federal-reserve/v/quantitative-easing). That's fine. He might even be given a chance to go through with it. Why, you say, isn't he gonna fail like Greece recently? Well yes, sure, but Greece is poor and in debt and Britain *looks like* it is rich and not in debt. So all is gonna be fine. Grandpa Marx saw communism being introduced first in rich and developed countries and not in the poor ones. Problem is that it takes a lot to perform reforms that are supposed to bring "[billions](http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/corbyn-omics-labour-left-frontrunner-wants-10-minimum-wage-abolition-business-tax-subsidies-1512070)" of which Corbyn speaks.Same with the £10 minimum wage, a £1 increase over Osbourne's pledge. Fine. Germany has a minimum wage of 8.5 euro and it's great, but it's enforcement requires a lot of control that even the German bureaucracy has [trouble](http://www.taz.de/Kritik-an-Gesetzentwurf-der-Koalition/!5045071/) to muster.Scraping tuition fees, easing the real estate market for young people. All great. Anything about how to deliver that? Not really. Corbyn offers a standard package (which does not mean bad, I mean, lets try, by all means) with very little about how to enact this package. Varoufakis at least had a plan. Crazy, unsustainable and wild, but a plan and he tired to implement it - just for this courage we should admire him. It is unknown if Corbyn has such a plan, but I doubt it. Hopefully he will prove me wrong.
###Foreign policyMoving on, Corbyn's views on defence and geopolitics are, frankly speaking, laughable. Russians have a great expression for people of such views, _polezniye duraki_, useful idiots, but it has been (already!) overused against Corbyn and I don't think that stressing it over and over again serves a purpose anymore. Anyway, Corbyn's views. Withdrawal from NATO. Sounds as probable as Boris Johnson getting a haircut and I think he is just saying that. Nuclear disarmament? Fine. The problem is that Britain, described by Gore Vidal as not a country but "[an American aircraft carrier](https://books.google.de/books?id=qOO4uwAiODwC&pg=PA45&lpg=PA45&dq=This+isn%27t+a+country,+it%27s+an+American+aircraft+carrier.&source=bl&ots=KYsPrdnBpf&sig=B3-3uBap8Fq5PQH6LkQVgjVuk-E&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CDYQ6AEwBGoVChMIvoft8fCwxwIViD8aCh3hKgNY#v=onepage&q=This%20isn't%20a%20country%2C%20it's%20an%20American%20aircraft%20carrier.&f=false)" has already little to say over its nuclear policy, as the whole sad Trident debate shows. And Britain does not need the Left to slowly curb and disarm its armed forces, as the [Army 2020](https://www.gov.uk/government/news/defence-secretary-on-army-2020) plan shows. The Tories will do the trick, don't you worry.Britain’s decline as a middle power (although some still [seem to be living](http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/sep/22/admiral-lord-west-diplomatic-blunder) in Neverland and dream of a superpower status) will happen anyway, Corbyn or not. In that respect some of his policies in this area might actually help out and make this transition swifter, less painful and much less humiliating. Corbyn's critique of Iraq War (and he is right, by Jove, although the whole business with "illegal war" starts to annoy me a bit, as if there was a possibility of a "legal" war in Iraq) leads him more and more onto isolationist positions that are a tad bit dangerous to occupy. I hate to bring the whole sad story of 39-45, but y'know Jeremy, that's how it ends. It's all fun and games and peace for our time until somebody gets hurt.
His views on the Central and Eastern Europe? No touch with [reality](http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/07/jeremy-corbyn-interview-we-are-not-doing-celebrity-personality-or-abusive-politics): "We should have gone down the road Ukraine went down in 1990, which was an informal agreement with Russia that Ukraine would be a non-nuclear state [and] would be non-aligned in its foreign policy. The interesting thing is why Russia didn’t turn all that into a treaty, why they just accepted it as an informal agreement with Nato, the EU and the US." Seriously? Jeremy, where have you been past two years? Maybe, just maybe, a short seminar on the formidable Enrico Berlinguer (leader of the Communist Party of Italy) and his stance towards NATO, Russia, freedom, democracy and communism as a whole would help - it's always [good to learn](https://books.google.de/books?id=prUfOcIon3YC&pg=PA366&lpg=PA366&dq=enrico+berlinguer+on+prague+spring&source=bl&ots=TaWd_PtgQs&sig=uhejL-3X8vUaOF2mtiPr9S38tuc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CCYQ6AEwAWoVChMI4-Sd-YOzxwIVzLYUCh06CAFb#v=onepage&q=enrico%20berlinguer%20on%20prague%20spring&f=false) from the wiser and more experienced.But this is peanuts compared to the nasty business of his EU stance. Let us all hope that this is just tactics, but even if, it is a step too far to even [toy with the idea](http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/07/25/jeremy-corbyn-refuses-to-_n_7870992.html) of campaigning for Britain's withdrawal from EU. Of course the Union is broken and it is riddled by problems. But it's all we got. Do you prefer to have a shitty bike or no bike, Jeremy? This whole cutting off the nose to spite the face business is a dangerous gamble. Just imagine what shenanigans the Tories together with UKIP would have produced if Britain was NOT in the EU.
On the whole in his foreign policy views Corbyn sounds dangerously close to the likes of [Le Pen and Farage](https://euobserver.com/political/129071). Moreover, there is just no justicfication for that. Maybe Corbyn just needs his [Andre Gide moment](https://archive.org/details/returnfromtheuss010214mbp) to see the consequences of his statements.
###Fine. So?Ok, you might ask, where are you going with all this? One step further and we will land in Blairite territory with views like that. True. And this is why, although I disagree with Corbyn on so many issues I recognise that he is, to turn the quote upside down, the hero that the British Left needs but not necessarily the one it deserves. It is either Corbyn or nothing. Andy Burnham wouldn't know how to run a rotten borough, not to mention a national party. Yvette Cooper has a lot of good ideas but this whole digital revolution stuff sounds like a horrible wishy-washy. And there is Liz Kendall, who might just be Tony Blair in a wig dressed up as a woman or possibly Teresa May's stunt double after a series of plastic operations. "[The state will have to learn to let go](http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/29/labour-must-empower-public-service-users)"? Ugh.And this is why Jeremy Corbyn needs to win. Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more. Without his victory in the leadership race, Labour is gonna dissolve into a centrist, nod-nod party, whose only purpose will be to provide token opposition for the next decades of Tory governments. A fig leaf of post-democracy, of perpetual consensus, where there is no debate, because everybody essentially has the same views.Left in Britain is finished. But this is because Britain, in its current form, is finished. It has been put on life support by the recent failure of Scotland's bid for independence and George Osborne’s austerity policies. But everybody involved knows that this gives it maybe fifteen maybe twenty years more. Tories are already busily preparing themselves to govern unchallenged in England alone. What is Labour going to do?Corbyn's victory, although he is probably gonna fail in general election (if he will even manage to stay as the leader till then), will give Labour a chance to reinvent itself, realign to the left and maybe, maybe even survive. But wait! I criticised so many of his views and yet I am willing to risk him getting into power? Sure. Because if, if he actually becomes prime minister (again: highly unlikely) similarly to other nostalgic leftist like Tsipras, he will quickly see that the old model leads you nowhere, most of his policies and ideas coming to naught. And then, after him, if we are all lucky, a new leader will emerge, who will build something more fit for the current times and challenges.As my good friend told me recently the problem with the Left is that it hasn't changed and adapted at all, while capitalism reinvents itself constantly. It is time to move forwards. Moses lead the Israelites through the desert for forty years, so God could kill off the generation that still lived in slavery and would not cope with freedom. Also Moses had to die, but not before God gave him a chance to see the Promised Land from Mount Nebo. Lets give Corbyn a chance for a glimpse, shall we?
[^1]: This text is too long. It contains strong opinions and a description of Theresa May's stunt double. It contains traces of vaguely obscure popculture references. You have been warned.