---
layout: post
title: No country for left men
---

This text is not going to be extremely original.
This text is not an in-depth analysis of the current situation in Poland or, for that matter, an attempt to present a remedy for it.
This text has been written because (again) we have reached the times in which if you do not take a stand, if you do not declare yourself clearly on one side or the other, you cannot conceivably look at yourself in the mirror.

I am against the democratically elected dictatorship in Poland.

With that out of the system let us discuss briefly why. After all there are more pressing problems in the world than some God-forsaken country in Central Europe, which is ruled by an emotionally repressed moral dwarf. There is a war in Syria. A crisis in Venezuela. Cholera outbreak in Haiti. A 70-year old baby monster might become the president of United States. So you all deserve an explanation why should you worry about Poland.
You should worry because Poland has been the greatest success of the European project to ever exist on the face of the Continent. A country where thirty years ago there was just vinegar on the shop-shelves and which was in the throngs of a bizarre military-communist junta has become a mid-income, democratic and pluralist country.
Poland did not do it alone. Of course, millions of Poles worked hard to achieve this but in the end Poland is the great brain-child of the European cooperation. Without financial, military and political help of Europe it would be nothing like this. And when other countries of the former Eastern Block stumbled and got into terrible hiccups over their respective economic transformations or lost anything but the vestiges of democracy (Hungary, I’m looking at you, kid), Poland still pushed forward. The drab, grey cities of my childhood are gone. Poland was an example that wir, indeed, schaffen das.
What went wrong? This transformation came at a great cost. Transformation left many behind; others could not find themselves in the new, harsh reality. If there was a sin in the Polish project it was to look away from the socialist ideals of Solidarity, to forget that the original postulates put forward during the Gdańsk strikes of 1980 were social, economic and very much “left” in nature. Millions of people abandoned their lives and the country in search of better economic prospects, education (yours truly), and sometimes just because they did not want to wait another generation until the country catches up with the West. Where did they go? To Europe, mostly. And in those better days, when the spectre of far right was still a far prospect, Europe generously took the tired and the poor, the huddled masses, thus giving the country a bit more time.
But still millions were left behind. A new generation came, that did not remember forty years in the desert, for which communism was a distant and vague time. They teamed up with people of the older generations who did not go well through the economic transformation, who found themselves in an ideological limbo. Together they voted into power a lonely, grief-stricken and vengeful dictator wannabe, surrounded by questionable and bizarre bunch consisting of forgotten opposition fighters, minor communist apparatchiks and, alas as always, the strange satellites of the Catholic Church. They did not do that because they loved him. They wanted to be heard – just like Brexit people in UK did not all want to leave EU. When you live in a small town in a poor region of a country the capital seems to be far, far away – I know how it feels myself – and boy were they heard. The little gnome went on to dismantle one of the few projects that Europe can look at and say: “We  did well”.
This is what happens if you get drunk on unabashed capitalism and forget that somebody has to pay for it. Let Poland, a country where women have to go on strike in order to protect their basic rights, be a forewarning to others that have not yet slid into the abyss. Run, you fools. Run from the clutches of neoliberal, petty, sad right-wing governments. Give me my Europe back.
You do not want to wake up in a place where somebody can be beaten up for speaking German in a tram; where the state TV segregates people into good and bad according to their ties with Lidl; where you can sit in the middle of the day and eat your lunch when suddenly a passer-by remarks that your beard is too long, therefore Islamic and everybody wearing such beards should be executed. Believe me, you do not want that.

Nevertheless I carry in my pocket a passport of that country and it gives me both a right and an obligation to speak up.
